# Epoch Lifecycle Smart contract

| Status        | (Proposed)       |
:-------------- |:---------------------------------------------------- |
| **FLIP #**    | [](https://github.com/onflow/flow/pull/) (update when you have PR #)|
| **Feature PR** | [Epoch Contracts](https://github.com/onflow/flow-core-contracts/pull/63) |
| **Author(s)** | Josh Hannan (joshua.hannan@dapperlabs.com) |
| **Sponsor**   | Josh Hannan (joshua.hannan@dapperlabs.com)            |
| **Updated**   | 2021-06-07                                           |

## Objective

Enable tracking epoch phases and metadata with a state machine.
This is primarily implemented in a Cadence smart contract.

## Motivation

When epochs are fully implemented on Flow, every node must participate in the epoch protocol
by using the `FlowEpoch` contract and its associated contracts, `FlowIDTableStaking`, `FlowEpochClusterQC`, and `FlowDKG`.

## User Benefit

The benefits of implementing this as a smart contract are:
* Easier auditability
* Easier upgradability without having to perform a fork
* Integration with other epoch-related smart contracts

## Design Proposal

### Assumptions and Design Goals (Up for discussion)
* No exessive gas: All operations should prioritize efficiency and attempt to be O(1) time complexity
* Should be deployed to the same account as all the other epoch contracts
* Should be the only place needed to go to for all historic epoch releated metadata 
* Should be able to run on its own without the need for intervention from an external admin unless absolutely necessary
* Should support an initial phase where phase transitions can be controlled manually.

### High Level Design

There are three epoch phases:
* The Staking Auction: The longest phase when nodes perform staking operations
* Epoch Setup: Shorter phase where necessary processes happen for the upcoming epoch.
* Epoch Commit: Shortest phase to give all nodes time to sync before the next epoch starts.
These are tracked by the `EpochPhase` enum and happen in the same order has shown above.

The length of epoch phases is measured in views, and the smart contract stores these
phase length fields in the `configurableMetadata` field.

When the current view surpasses the view calculated to be the end of the current phase,
the epoch smart contract transitions to the next phase. If the current phase is the `EpochCommit` phase,
the epoch increments the current epoch counter and moves the the Staking Auction phase of a new epoch.

The contract defines two types of "Admin" resources

The first is the `Admin` resource that has the authority to change some of the configurable metadata
of the epoch smart contract, such as the number of views in the epoch or in a particular phase,
or the number of collector clusters in the network.
This resource object will live in the service account where it will be used to tweak these parameters if necessary.
This should not need to be used often, only for very important changes
that the network will agree upon in a decentralized manner.
```cadence
pub resource Admin {
    pub fun updateEpochViews(_ newEpochViews: UInt64)

    pub fun updateAuctionViews(_ newAuctionViews: UInt64)

    pub fun updateDKGPhaseViews(_ newPhaseViews: UInt64)

    pub fun updateNumCollectorClusters(_ newNumClusters: UInt16)

    pub fun updateFLOWSupplyIncreasePercentage(_ newPercentage: UFix64)
}
```

There is also the `Heartbeat` resource, which runs the Epoch state machine.
The resource has and `advanceBlock()` function which is expected to be called every
block by the system chunk in the node software. This function checks to see if the required
conditions have been met to trigger a phase transition, and will constantly transition through
epoch phases as nodes are added to and removed from the network and participate in other node operation responsibilities.

The `Heartbeat` resource will live in the service account and be controlled manually in the first phase of epochs,
but eventually will be completely automated by the protocol and node software.

The Epoch account also stores the `Admin` objects from the other epoch contracts,
and accesses those in order to perform administrative operations on them
such as paying rewards to stakers, starting the Quorum certificate generation, and 
stopping the DKG.

When a phase transition occurs, the `Heartbeat` resource calls other utility methods in the epoch contract
to update epoch metadata and trigger these important changes in the other epoch contracts.

The epoch contract also restricts the creation of QC and DKG resource objects.
It has public functions to get objects for a node, but these functions require the caller
to provide a reference to their `FlowIDTableStaking.NodeStaker` object in order to prove that 
that have ownership of the node object for their node and that they deserve the objects for QC or DKG.



The smart contract also defines public getter functions to query all of the public information in the contract,
such as all historical, current, or proposed epoch metadata, and the current phase or counter.

```cadence
    /// Returns the metadata from the specified epoch
    /// or nil if it isn't found
    pub fun getEpochMetadata(_ epochCounter: UInt64): EpochMetadata?

    /// Returns the metadata that is able to be configured by the admin
    pub fun getConfigMetadata(): Config

    /// The proposed Epoch counter is always the current counter plus 1
    pub fun proposedEpochCounter(): UInt64
```


### Drawbacks

* Still researching alternative architectures. There could be better options.

### Alternatives Considered

* Have not considered many other alternatives, but are open to suggestions

### Performance Implications

* randomizing and sorting collector nodes has to iterate through all collector nodes multiple times, but this should not 
  be an issue because the number of collector nodes will never reach very high numbers
* historical epoch metadata will increase linearly as time passes and has no bound for now,
  but we will store the epoch metadata in a storage slot instead of in a contract field so that the increasing size
  of the metadata dictionary will not significantly affect the performance of regular operations of the contract.
* `FlowEpoch.Heartbeat.advanceBlock()` needs to be called once every block, so it will take up space in time during each 
  block, but this is probably necessary.

### Dependencies

* Dependencies (smart contracts):
    * FungibleToken
    * FlowToken
    * FlowIDTableStaking
    * FlowEpochClusterQC
    * FlowDKG
* Dependent projects: 
    * flow-core-contracts (adding `FlowEpoch` contract),

### Engineering Impact

* minimal changes to build time and test time.
* Joshua Hannan will maintain the code and unit tests. 

### Tutorials and Examples

* See [FlowEpoch unit tests](https://github.com/onflow/flow-core-contracts/blob/feature/epochs/lib/go/test/flow_epoch_test.go) for how this process is handled.
* See the [Epoch transactions directory](https://github.com/onflow/flow-core-contracts/tree/feature/epochs/transactions/epoch) for example transactions

### User Impact

* Regular Flow token holders and users will only be impacted if they are staking their tokens.
  They will not be able to stake outside of the Staking Auction phase, which will likely be less than a day
  near the end of each epoch.
* Node operators will have to update their setups to utilize the Epoch smart contract functionality,
  but instructions for this will be provided separately.

## Questions and Discussion Topics

Seed this with open questions you require feedback on from the FLIP process. 
What parts of the design still need to be defined?